---
categories:
- 📚 TD/TP
---

# 📚 | TP 4: Router

:::info
Unlike TDs, TPs must be done individually. Therefore, the solution you find to the problem may differ from one student to another.
:::

In the context of developing a REST API, an HTTP router is a key component. It allows directing HTTP requests to the appropriate part of the code based on the requested URL and the HTTP method used (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, etc.).
This routing system is essential for organizing the different routes of a REST API to properly structure operations on resources such as users, articles, or products.

For example, my endpoint (URL) `POST /user` will be linked to my PHP function `createUser($request)`.

## Doing the TP

### 1. Create the project structure

- **Session 3/TP4/**
  - `autoloader.php` (see [add an autoloader](#2-add-an-autoloader))
  - `routes.php` - Script returning a simple array containing all the defined routes. For example: `return [];`
  - public/
    - `index.php` - Script that will handle all incoming HTTP requests and perform routing
  - framework/
    - `Method.php` - String - Enumeration of different HTTP methods
      - GET, POST, PUT, or DELETE
    - `ResponseType.php` - String - Enumeration of different response types
      - JSON, XML, or HTML
    - `Response.php` - PHP class representing an HTTP response
      - _$type_ - ResponseType
      - _$content_ - String - response content (body)
      - _$code_ - Int - return code
    - `Route.php` - PHP class representing a route
      - _$method_ - Method
      - _$endpoint_ - String - endpoint URL, for example: /users
      - _$controller_ - String - Controller class name associated, for example: if my controller is named TestController, I could use TestController::class
      - _$function_ - String - Controller function to call
  - controllers/
    - `MyTestController.php` - PHP class representing a REST resource. This class only contains functions with `array $request` as a parameter and returns only `new Response(...)`
    - Other controllers...

### 2. Add an autoloader

An autoloader is a file that automatically loads all PHP classes in your code, simplifying their import and usage.

Add this file at the root of your project:

```php title="autoloader.php"
<?php

/* Code from internet, automatically load classes if they are currently not loaded */

// https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.oop5.autoload.php

spl_autoload_register(function ($className) {
    $filename = __DIR__ . DIRECTORY_SEPARATOR . str_replace('\\', '/', $className) . '.php';
    if (file_exists($filename)) require_once($filename);
});
```

To use the autoloader, simply add this line at the very beginning of your `index.php`:

```php
// Import the autoloader, which loads all the namespaces and classes
require(__DIR__ . '/../autoloader.php');
```

### 3. Start the server

Once at the root of your project `/Session 3/TP4/`, you need to use the following command:

```shell
php -S localhost:8080 -t public
```

:::warning
Note that the served directory is `public` and not `TP4`. This allows for different user access, my public directory will be accessible by almost everyone (774). Whereas my TP4 directory is only accessible by the current user (700).

However, this does not matter in our TP.
:::

### Useful Information

- Using the autoloader: https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.namespaces.definition.php
  - Don't forget to add a namespace at the beginning of your classes and enumerations
- OOP in PHP: https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.oop5.basic.php
- Typed Enumerations in PHP: https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.enumerations.backed.php
- Importing a variable from another file (`routes.php`): https://www.php.net/manual/fr/function.require.php

### Regarding the `index.php` file

Script that will handle all incoming HTTP requests and perform routing.

This script should, in order:

1. Load the autoloader
2. Import the routes array (`routes.php`),
3. Get the endpoint and method used by the client
4. Compare all defined routes to the client request (matching endpoint and method)
   - If the route matches
     1. Instantiate the controller (`$controller = new $route->controller;`)
     2. Call the controller's function (`$response = $controller->{$route->function}($_REQUEST);`)
     3. Get the response
   - If the route does not match
     1. Create a 404 response
5. Adjust the response headers (Code, Content-type)
6. Send back the response

You can ask for help if needed.
